Help, Grandsire, help!
My aunt Lavinia follows me everywhere.
I know not why.
Good uncle Marcus, see how swift she comes.
Alas, sweet aunt, I know not what you mean.
Stand by me, Lucius.
Do not fear thine aunt.
She loves thee, boy, too well to do thee harm.
Ay, when my father was in Rome, she did.
What means my niece Lavinia by these signs?
Fear her not, Lucius; somewhat does she mean.
See, Lucius, see how much she makes of thee.
Somewhither would she have thee go with her.
Ah, boy, Cornelia never with more care
read to her sons than she hath read to thee
sweet poetry and Tully's orator.
Canst thou not guess wherefore she plies thee thus?
My lord, I know not, I, nor can I guess,
unless some fit or frenzy do possess her.
For I have heard my grandsire say full oft
extremities of grief would make men mad.
And I have read that Hecuba of Troy ran mad for sorrow.
That made me to fear.
Although, my lord, I know my noble aunt
loves me as dear as e'er my mother did
and would not but in fury fright my youth,
which made me down to throw my books and fly
causeless, perhaps.
But pardon me, sweet aunt.
And, madam, if my uncle Marcus go,
I will most willingly attend your ladyship.
Lucius, I will.
How now, Lavinia.
Marcus, what means this?
Some book there is that she desires to see.
Which is it, girl, of these?
Open them, boy.
But thou art deeper read and better skilled.
Come and take choice of all my library,
and so beguile thy sorrow, till the heavens reveal
the damned contriver of this deed.
Why lifts she up her arms in sequence thus?
I think she means that there were
more than one confederate in the fact.
Ay, more there was;
or else to heaven she heaves them for revenge.
Lucius, what book is that she tosseth so?
Grandsire, 'tis Ovid's "Metamorphoses."
My mother gave it me.
For love of her that's gone,
perhaps she culled it from among the rest.
Soft.
So busily she turns the leaves.
What would she find?
Help her.
Lavinia, shall I read?
This is the tragic tale of Philomel
and treats of Tereus' treason and his rape.
And rape, I fear, was root of thy annoy.
See, brother, see.
Note how she quotes the leaves.
Lavinia, were thou thus surprised, sweet girl,
ravished and wronged as Philomela was,
forced in the vast and ruthless, gloomy woods?
Ay, see, see.
Such a place there is where we did hunt
O, had we never, never hunted there!
patterned by this the poet here describes,
by nature made for murders and for rapes.
O, why should nature build so foul a den,
unless the gods delight in tragedies?
Give signs, sweet girl, for here are none but friends,
what Roman lord it was durst do the deed.
Or slunk not Saturnine, as Tarquin erst,
that left the camp to sin in Lucrece' bed?
Sit down, sweet niece.
Brother, sit down with me.
Apollo, Pallas, Jove, and Mercury,
inspire me, that I may this treason find.
My lord, look here.
Look here, Lavinia.
This sandy plot is plain.
Guide, if thou canst, this after me.
I have writ my name
without the help of any hand at all.
Cursed be the heart that forced us to this shift.
Write thou, good niece, and here display at last
what God will have discovered for revenge.
Heaven guide thy pen to print thy sorrows plain,
that we may know the traitors and the truth.
Do you read, my lord, what she hath writ?
"Rape."
"Chiron."
"Demetrius."
Magni Dominator poli, Tam lentus audis scelera?
Tam lentus vides?
O, calm thee, gentle lord,
although I know there is enough written upon this earth
to stir a mutiny in the mildest thoughts
and arm the minds of infants to exclaims.
Kneel down with me.
Lavinia, kneel.
And kneel, sweet boy, the Roman Hector's hope
and swear with me  as with the woeful fere
and father of that chaste, dishonored dame,
Lord Junius Brutus sware for Lucrece's rape
that we will prosecute by good advice
mortal revenge upon these traitorous Goths
and see their blood or die with this reproach.
'Tis sure enough, and you knew how.
But if you hunt these bear-whelps, then beware.
The dam will wake; and if she wind ye once,
she's with the lion deeply still in league
and lulls him while she playeth on her back.
And when he sleeps will she do what she list.
You are a young huntsman, Marcus; let alone.
Come.
I will go get a leaf of brass and with a gad of steel
will write these words and lay it by.
The angry northern wind will blow these sands
like Sibyl's leaves abroad.
And where's our lesson then?
Boy, what say you?
I say, my lord, that if I were a man,
their mother's bedchamber should not be safe
for these base bondmen to the yoke of Rome.
Ay, there's my boy.
Thy father hath full oft
for his ungrateful country done the like.
And, uncle, so will I, and if I live.
Come, go with me into mine armory.
Lucius, I'll fit thee, and my boy withal
shall carry from me to the empress' sons
presents that I intend to send them both.
Come, come; thou'lt do my message, wilt thou not?
Ay, and with my dagger in their bosoms, Grandsire.
No, boy, not so.
I'll teach thee another course.
Lavinia, come.
Marcus, look to my house.
Lucius and I'll go brave it at the court.
Ay, marry, will we, sir, and we'll be waited on.
O, heavens, can you hear a good man groan
and not relent and not compassion him?
Marcus, attend him in his ecstasy
that hath more scars of sorrow in his heart
than foemen's marks upon his battered shield,
and yet so just that he will not revenge.
Revenge the heavens for old Andronicus.
Demetrius, here's the son of Lucius.
He hath some message to deliver us.
Ay, some mad message from his mad grandfather.
My lords, with all the humbleness I may,
I greet your honors from Andronicus
and pray the Roman gods confound you both.
Gramercy, lovely Lucius.
What's the news?
That you are both deciphered that's the news
for villains marked with rape.
May it please you, my grandsire,
well advised, hath sent by me
the goodliest weapons of his armory
to gratify your honorable youth,
the hope of Rome, for so he bid me say.
And so I do, and with his gifts present
Your Lordships, that whenever you have need,
you may be armed and appointed well.
And so I leave you both...
like bloody villains.
What's here?
A scroll, and written round about.
Let's see.
"Integer vitae, scelerisque purus,
non eget Mauri iaculis, nec arcu."
O, 'tis a verse in Horace.
I know it well.
I read it in the grammar long ago.
Ay, just  A verse in Horace.
Right, you have it.
Now, what a thing it is to be an ass.
Here's no sound jest.
The old man hath found their guilt
and sends them weapons wrapped about with lines
that wound, beyond their feeling, to the quick.
But were our witty empress well afoot,
she would applaud Andronicus' conceit.
But let her rest in her unrest awhile.
And now, young lords, was't not a happy star
led us to Rome, strangers,
and more than so  captives
to be advanced to this height?
It doth me good to see so great a lord
basely insinuate and send us gifts.
Had he not reason, Lord Demetrius?
Did you not use his daughter very friendly?
I would we had a thousand Roman dames
at such a bay, by turn to serve our lust.
A charitable wish, and full of love.
Here lacks but your mother for to say amen.
And would she for twenty thousand more.
Come, let us go and pray to all the gods
for our beloved mother in her pains.
Pray to the devils; the gods have given us over.
Why do the emperor's trumpets flourish thus?
Belike, for joy the emperor hath a son.
Soft. Who comes here?
O, tell me, did you see Aaron the Moor?
Well, more or less, or ne'er a whit at all,
here Aaron is; and what with Aaron now?
O, gentle Aaron, we are all undone.
Now help, or woe betide thee evermore.
Why, what a caterwauling dost thou keep.
What dost thou wrap and fumble in thy arms?
O, that which I would hide from heaven's eye.
Our empress' shame and stately Rome's disgrace.
She is delivered, lords; she is delivered.
To whom?
I mean she is brought abed.
Well, God give her good rest.
What hath he sent her?
A devil.
Why, then she is the devil's dam;
a joyful issue.
A joyless, dismal, black, and sorrowful issue.
Here is the babe, as loathsome as a toad
amongst the fair-faced breeders of our clime.
The empress sends it thee  thy stamp, thy seal
and bids thee christen it with thy dagger's point.
Zounds, ye whore!
Is black so base a hue?
Sweet blowse,
you are a beauteous blossom sure.
Villain, what hast thou done?
That which thou canst not undo.
Thou hast undone our mother.
Villain, I have done thy mother.
And therein, hellish dog, hast thou undone her.
Woe to her chance,
Damned her loathed choice.
Accursed the offspring of so foul a fiend.
It shall not live.
It shall not die.
Aaron, it must; the mother wills it so.
What, must it, nurse?
Then let no man but I do execution
on my flesh and blood.
I'll broach the tadpole on my rapier's point.
Nurse, give it to me!
My sword shall soon dispatch it.
Sooner this sword shall plough thy bowels up!
Stay, murderous villains; will you kill your brother!
Now, by the burning tapers of the sky
that shone so brightly when this boy was got,
he dies upon my scimitar's sharp point
that touches this, my first-born son and heir.
I tell you, younglings, not Enceladus,
with all his threatening band of Typhon's brood,
nor great Alcides, nor the god of war,
shall seize this prey out of his father's hands.
What, what, ye sanguine, shallow-hearted boys
ye white-limed walls, ye alehouse painted signs!
Coal-black is better than another hue
in that it scorns to bear another hue.
For all the water in the ocean
can never turn the swan's black legs to white,
although she lave them hourly in the flood.
Tell the empress from me, I am of age to keep mine own;
excuse it how she can.
Wilt thou betray thy noble mistress thus?
My mistress is my mistress, this my self
the vigor and the picture of my youth.
This before all the world do I prefer.
This maugre all the world will I keep safe,
or some of you shall smoke for it in Rome.
By this our mother is for ever shamed.
Rome will despise her for this foul escape.
The emperor in his rage will doom her death.
I blush to think upon this ignomy.
Why, there's the privilege your beauty bears.
Fie, treacherous hue, that will betray with blushing
the close enacts and counsels of thy heart.
Here's a young lad framed of another leer.
Look how the black slave smiles upon the father,
as who should say, "Old lad, I am thine own."
He is your brother, lords, sensibly fed
of that self-blood that first gave life to you;
and from your womb where you imprisoned were,
he is enfranchised and brought to light.
Nay, he is your brother by the surer side,
although my seal be stamped in his face.
Aaron, what shall I say unto the empress?
Advise thee, Aaron, what is to be done,
and we will all subscribe to thy advice.
Save thou the child, so we may all be safe.
Then sit we down and let us all consult.
My son and I will have the wind of you.
Keep there.
Now talk at pleasure of your safety.
How many women saw this child of his?
Why, so, brave lords
When we join in league, I am a lamb.
But if you brave the Moor,
the chafed boar, the mountain lioness,
the ocean swells not so as Aaron storms.
But say again, how many saw the child?
Cornelia the midwife and myself,
and no one else but the delivered empress.
The empress, the midwife, and yourself.
Two may keep counsel when the third's away.
Go to the empress; tell her this I said.
Weeke, weeke!
So cries a pig prepared to the spit.
What mean'st thou, Aaron? Wherefore didst thou this?
O, Lord, sir, 'tis a deed of policy.
Shall she live to betray this guilt of ours,
a long-tongued babbling gossip?
No, lords, no.
And now be it known to you my full intent.
Not far, one Muliteus, my countryman.
His wife but yesternight was brought to bed.
His child is like to her, fair as you are.
Go pack with him, give the mother gold
and tell them both the circumstance of all,
and how by this their child shall be advanced
and be received for the emperor's heir
and substituted in the place of mine
to calm this tempest whirling in the court;
and let the emperor dandle him for his own.
Hark ye, lords.
You see I have given her physic.
And you must needs bestow her funeral.
The fields are near, and you are gallant grooms.
This done, see that you take no longer days,
but send the midwife to me presently.
The midwife and the nurse well made away,
then let the ladies tattle what they please.
Aaron, I see thou wilt not trust the air with secrets.
For this care of Tamora,
herself and hers are highly bound to thee.
Now to the Goths, as swift as swallow flies,
there to dispose this treasure in mine arms
and secretly to greet the empress' friends.
Come on, you thick-lipped slave.
I'll bear you hence;
for it is you that puts us to our shifts.
I'll make you feed on berries and on roots
and feed on curds and whey and suck the goat
and cabin in a cave and bring you up
to be a warrior and command a camp.
Come, Marcus, come.
Kinsmen, this is the way.
Sir boy, let me see your archery.
Look you draw home enough, and 'tis there straight.
The goddess of justice has left the earth.
Be you remembered, Marcus: she's gone, she's fled.
Sirs, take you to your tools.
You, cousins,
shall so sound the ocean, cast your nets.
Happily you may catch her in the sea.
Well, there's as little justice as at land.
No; Publius and Sempronius, you must do it.
'Tis you must dig; with mattock and with spade,
pierce the inmost centre of the earth.
Then, when you come to Pluto's region,
I pray you, deliver him this petition.
Tell him it is for justice and for aid
and that it comes from old Andronicus,
shaken with sorrows in ungrateful Rome.
O, Rome.
Well, well, I made thee miserable
that time I threw the people's suffrages
on him that now doth tyrannize o'er me.
Go get you gone, and pray be careful all.
Leave you not one man-of-war unsearched.
This wicked emperor may have shipped her hence;
then kinsmen, we may go pipe for justice.
Publius, is not this a heavy case,
to see thy noble uncle thus distract?
Therefore, my lords, it highly us concerns
by day and night to attend him carefully
and feed his humor kindly as we may
till time beget some careful remedy.
My son, his sorrows are past remedy.
Join with the Goths, and with revengeful war
take wreak on Rome for this ingratitude,
and vengeance on the traitor Saturnine.
Publius, how now?
How now, my masters?
What, have you met with her?
No, my good lord. but Pluto sends you word,
if you will have Revenge in hell, you shall.
Marry, for Justice, she is so employed, he thinks,
with Jove in heaven, or somewhere else,
so that perforce you must needs stay a time.
He doth me wrong to feed me with delays.
I'll dive into the burning lake below
and pull her out of Acheron by the heels.
Marcus, we are but shrubs, no cedars we,
no big-boned men framed of the cyclops' size.
But metal, Marcus, steel to the very back,
yet wrung with wrongs more than our backs can bear.
And, sith there is no justice in earth or hell,
we will solicit heaven, move the gods
to send down justice for to wreak our wrongs.
Come, to this gear.
You are a good archer, Marcus.
"Ad Jovem " that's for you.
Here "Ad Apollinem."
"Ad Martem " that's for myself.
Here, boy, "To Pallas."
Here "To Mercury."
"To Saturn," Caius  not to Saturnine.
You were as good to shoot against the wind.
Come to it, boy.
Marcus, loose when I bid.
Of my word, I have written to effect.
There's not a god left unsolicited.
Kinsmen, shoot all your shafts into the court.
We will afflict the emperor in his pride.
Now, masters,
draw.
Well done, Lucius!
My lord, I aimed a mile beyond the moon.
Your letter is with Jupiter by this.
Why, there it goes.
God give his lordship joy.
News, news from heaven.
Marcus, the post is come.
Sirrah, what tidings?
Have you any letters?
Shall I have justice?
What says Jupiter?
Oh, the gibbet-maker?
He says that he hath taken them down again,
for the man must not be hanged till the next week.
But what says Jupiter, I ask thee?
Alas, sir, I know not Jupiter.
I never drank with him in all my life.
Why, villain, art not thou the carrier?
Ay, of my pigeons, sir; nothing else.
Why, didst thou not come from heaven?
From heaven?
Alas, sir, no, I never came there.
God forbid I should be so bold
to press to heaven in my young days.
Why, I am going with my pigeons
to the Tribunal Plebs, to take up a matter
of brawl betwixt my uncle and one of the imperial's men.
Why, sir, this is as fit as can be
to serve you for your oration.
Let him deliver the pigeons to the emperor from you.
Can you deliver an oration to the emperor with a grace?
Nay, truly, sir.
I could never say grace in all my life.
Come hither, sirrah.
Make no more ado, but give your pigeons to the emperor.
By me thou shalt have justice at his hands.
Hold, hold.
Here is money for your charges.
Sirrah, can you with a grace deliver up a supplication?
Ay, sir.
Then here is a supplication for you.
And when you come to him,
at the first approach, you must kneel,
and then kiss his foot,
and then deliver up your pigeons,
and then look for your reward.
I'll be at hand, sir; see you do it bravely.
I warrant you, sir, I will.
Sirrah, hast thou a knife?
Ay, sir.
Well, let me see it.
Here, Marcus, fold it in the oration;
for thou hast made it like an humble suppliant.
And when you have given it to the emperor,
knock at my door; tell me what he says.
God be with you, sir; I will.
Come, Marcus, come.
Publius, follow me.
Why, lords, what wrongs are these!
Was ever seen an emperor in Rome
thus overborne, troubled, confronted thus and,
for the extent of egal justice, used in such contempt?
My lords, you know, as know the mightful gods,
however these disturbers of our peace
buzz in the people's ears, there nought hath passed
but even with law against the wilful sons
of old Andronicus.
And what and if his sorrows have so overwhelmed his wits?
Shall we be thus afflicted in his wreaks,
his fits, his frenzy, and his bitterness?
And now he writes to heaven for his redress.
See, here's "To Jove,"
and this "To Mercury."
This "To Apollo,"
this "To the God of War."
Sweet scrolls to fly about the streets of Rome!
What's this but libelling against the Senate
and blazoning our injustice everywhere?
A goodly humor, is it not, my lords,
as who would say in Rome no justice were?
But if I live, his feigned ecstasies
shall be no shelter to these outrages;
but he and his shall know that justice lives
in Saturninus' health, whom, if she sleep,
he'll so awake as he in fury
shall cut off the proudest conspirator that lives.
My gracious lord, my lovely Saturnine,
lord of my life, commander of my thoughts,
calm thee, and bear the faults of Titus' age,
the effects of sorrow for his valiant sons
whose loss hath pierced him deep and scarred his heart;
and rather comfort his distressed plight
than prosecute the meanest or the best for these contempts.
Why, thus it shall become high-witted Tamora
to gloze with all.
But Titus, I have touched thee to the quick,
thy life-blood out.
If Aaron now be wise, then all is safe,
the anchor in the port.
How now, good fellow.
Wouldst thou speak with us?
Yea, forsooth, and your mistership be imperial.
Empress I am, but yonder sits the emperor.
'Tis he.
God and Saint Stephen give you godden.
I have brought you a letter and a couple of pigeons here.
Go take him away, and hang him presently.
How much money must I have?
Come, sirrah; you must be hanged.
Hanged by our lady?
Then I have brought up a neck to a fair end.
Despiteful and intolerable wrongs!
Shall I endure this monstrous villainy?
I know from whence this same device proceeds.
May this be borne  as if his traitorous sons
that died by law for murder of our brother
have by my means been butchered wrongfully?
Go drag the villain hither by the hair.
Nor age nor honor shall shape privilege.
For this proud mock, I'll be thy slaughterman,
sly frantic wretch, that holp'st to make me great,
in hope thyself should govern Rome and me.
What news with thee, Aemilius?
Arm, my lords!
Rome never had more cause.
The Goths have gathered head,
and with a power of high resolved men bent to the spoil,
they hither march amain, under conduct of Lucius,
son to old Andronicus, who threats in course of his revenge
to do as much as ever Coriolanus did.
Is warlike Lucius general of the Goths?
These tidings nip me, and I hang the head
as flowers with frost, or grass beat down with storms.
Ay, now begins our sorrows to approach.
'Tis he the common people love so much.
Myself hath often heard them say
when I have walked like a private man
that Lucius' banishment was wrongfully,
and they have wished that Lucius were their emperor.
Why should you fear?
Is not your city strong?
Ay, but the citizens favor Lucius
and will revolt from me to succor him.
King, be thy thoughts imperious like thy name.
Is the sun dimmed, that gnats do fly in it?
The eagle suffers little birds to sing
and is not careful what they mean thereby,
knowing that with the shadow of his wings
he can at pleasure stint their melody.
Even so mayest thou the giddy men of Rome.
Then cheer thy spirit; for know thou, Emperor,
I will enchant the old Andronicus
with words more sweet and yet more dangerous
than baits to fish or honey-stalks to sheep,
when as the one is wounded with the bait,
the other rotted with delicious feed.
But he will not entreat his son for us.
If Tamora entreat him, then he will;
for I can smooth and fill his aged ears
with golden promises, that, were his heart
almost impregnable, his old ears deaf,
yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue.
Go thou before.
Be our ambassador.
Say that the emperor requests a parley
of warlike Lucius, and appoint the meeting
even at his father's house, the old Andronicus.
Aemilius, do this message honorably.
And if he stand on hostage for his safety,
bid him demand what pledge will please him best.
Your bidding shall I do effectually.
Now will I to that old Andronicus,
and temper him with all the art I have
to pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths.
And now, sweet emperor, be blithe again
and bury all thy fears in my devices.
Then go incessantly, and plead to him.